# RITC2024
## Rotman International Trading Competition (RITC)

Case Package Briefs
Case 01 Package - Day 2
COMMODITIES CASE
The Commodities Case challenges the ability of participants to trade in a closed supply and demand market for crude oil. Natural crude oil production and its use coupled with regulatory compliance in the form of carbon credits will form the framework for participants to engage in direct trade to meet each other’s objectives. The case will assess participants' comprehension of intricate market dynamics, requiring them to adeptly execute their roles while emphasizing teamwork and communication. The case encompasses various aspects, including crude oil production, refinement, storage, and the trading of both synthesized physical products and carbon credits.


Case 02 Package - Day 2
ETF CASE
The ETF Case challenges participants to apply their critical thinking and analytical skills in an environment where they must assess the liquidity risk associated with various tender offers. Throughout the case, participants will encounter multiple tender offers, requiring quick decisions on the profitability and subsequent acceptance, execution, or rejection of each offer. Profits can be generated by taking advantage of price differentials between market prices and prices offered in the private tenders. Once any tender has been accepted, participants should aim to efficiently close out their large positions to maximize returns.


Case 03 Package - Day 2
ALGORITHMIC CAPM FORECASTING CASE
The Algorithmic CAPM Forecasting Case is designed to challenge participants’ programming skills by developing algorithms using the RIT API to forecast future asset prices and automate trading strategies. Throughout the case, these algorithms will capture the historical prices of the securities, estimate market sensitivities with beta, forecast future asset return using CAPM model, identify price trend and submit orders to profit from private information about the changing market movement. Due to the high-frequency nature of the case, participants are encouraged to develop algorithms that can adapt to rapid changes in market dynamics using their selected programming languages.


Case 04 Package - Day 3
ELECTRICITY TRADING CASE
The Electricity Trading Case provides the opportunity for participants to collaborate within role-based teams in a setting governed by rigorous regulatory policies in the electricity trading market. Participants must predict electricity supply and demand, aligning their strategies with market conditions. Each team operates within a closed supply and demand framework, generating electricity via power plant assets, distributing it to customers, and accessing a forward market. Throughout the complete cycle of electricity markets, participants are tasked with dynamically shaping role-based strategies and executing trades optimally in response to prevailing market events.


Case 05 Package - Day 3
MathWorks VOLATILITY TRADING CASE
The MathWorks Volatility Trading Case enables participants to profit through the implementation of options strategies aimed at trading volatility. The options are based on a non-dividend-paying Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) named RTM, which tracks a major stock index. Participants will be able to trade shares of the ETF as well as 1-month and 2-month call/put options at 10 different strike prices. Information including the ETF price, options prices, and news releases will be provided. Participants are encouraged to leverage this information to identify mispricing opportunities and formulate options trading strategies accordingly.


Case 06 Package - Day 3
ALGORITHMIC MARKET MAKING CASE
The Algorithmic Market Making Case is designed to test participants’ programming skills, requiring them to create algorithms using the RIT API for automating market-making processes and responding to dynamic market conditions. Participants will craft a market-making algorithm aimed at capitalizing on the most profitable opportunities across different securities. In this context, the potential returns from bid-ask spread earnings are enhanced with a feebate structure, mirroring the generous rebates provided by new exchanges at the time. Given the high-frequency nature of the case, participants need to design algorithms capable of quickly adjusting to changes in market dynamics over time.


Scoring
The scoring and ranking methodology is designed to translate absolute performance into relative performance using a ranking system. This ranking system is designed to discourage participants from “betting the house” in one heat and generating very large absolute profits that will result in a clear win of the entire competition. Instead, participants’ absolute performance in each heat is converted into a series of ordinal ranks which are subsequently converted into a final case ranking. These case rankings are mapped to case scores and then combined under the following weights:


The scoring system is not intended to be extremely complex. However, throughout the trading competition there will be over 2,000 separate trading results. These results must then be averaged and ranked over several iterations to compute a final ranking and score. This document describes that process.

The purpose of the system is to reward consistently high performance (i.e. a team that places 8th, 5th, and 10th will have a higher final score than a team that places 1st, 10th, and 35th).

Commodities Case and Electricity Trading Case
The final P&L of each team member will be summed to form a dollar value of the team P&L. The teams are then ranked for each heat by the dollar values of the team P&L, with first place awarded to the team with the highest dollar value. In the event of a tie, the teams that have tied will be given the same rank. The teams below the tie will be given a rank based on the number of teams that have scored better than them. Therefore, if three teams tied for 2nd place, the ranking would be 1st, 2nd, 2nd, 2nd, and 5th.

Based on the above, each team’s heat ranks will be averaged and then the resulting averages will be ranked to determine their overall case rank. The team with the lowest average will be ranked first. This case ranking is then mapped to a point score where the lowest rank is given a score of n+1, where n is the number of teams below you plus the teams that tied with you.

Volatility Trading Case and ETF Case
For each heat, the final profits and losses (P&L) [1] of all participating members [2] of a team are summed to form a dollar value of the team P&L. The teams are then ranked for each heat by the dollar values of the team P&L with 1st place given to the team with the highest dollar value. In the event of a tie, the teams that have tied will be given the same rank. The teams below the tie will be given a rank based on the number of teams that have scored better than them. Therefore, if three teams tied for 2nd place, the ranking for the top five teams would be 1st, 2nd, 2nd, 2nd, and 5th.

Each team’s heat ranks are then averaged. Teams are then ranked based on their average heat rank to determine their final case rank. The team with the lowest average will be ranked first.

This case ranking is then mapped to a point score where the lowest rank (best score) is given a score of n+1, where n is the number of teams below you plus the teams that tied with you (i.e. the first place team out of 52 teams will get a score of 52, the last place team will get a score of 1). To continue the above example, if you are tied for 2nd place with three other teams, you will get a score of 51.

[1] For the ETF Case, the Adjusted P&L will be used that can be seen in the RIT from “Trader Info” tab.

For the Volatility Trading Case, the P&L (as shown in the RIT) will be decreased by the sum of penalties received by each team member as described in this Case Package.

[2] Two team members for the Volatility Trading Case and four team members for the ETF Case.

Algorithmic CAPM Forecasting Case and Algorithmic Market Making Case
Only one member from each team will be required to participate in the Algorithmic Cases. This member can be the same for both the cases or different for each Algorithmic Case. The final P&L of the participating team member will become the team P&L, which will be then ranked for each heat with first place awarded to the team with the highest dollar value. In the event of a tie, the teams that have tied will be given the same rank. The teams below the tie will be given a rank based on the number of teams that have scored better than them. Therefore, if three teams tied for 2nd place, the ranking would be 1st, 2nd, 2nd, 2nd, and 5th.

Based on the above, each team’s heat ranks will be averaged and then the resulting averages will be ranked to determine the final case rank. The team with the lowest average will be ranked first. This case ranking is then mapped to a point score where the lowest rank is given a score of n+1, where n is the number of teams below you plus the teams that tied with you.

Final Score
The final case scores are then multiplied by their case-weights to form a final weighted score. This final weighted score is used to rank teams, where the highest score is the best score. In the case of two or more teams having the same final weighted score, those teams will be ranked based on the variance of their final case scores. The team with the lowest variance will be ranked ahead of the others. For example, if the top 3 teams have the following scores:


Two (or more) teams that have the same score and the same variance will tie. In the event of a tie, the teams that have tied will be given the same rank. The teams below the tie will be given a rank based on the number of teams that have scored better than them. Therefore, if three teams tied for 2nd place, the ranking would be 1st, 2nd, 2nd, 2nd, and 5th.

Access Credentials
When registration closes, we will send you an email including your team’s four unique RIT Trader IDs & a Team Password for the competition.

Your RIT Trader IDs are like tickets to a movie. Your team is given four tickets, but team members may sit where they like.

For Example:

Seat (Trader ID) #1: ABCD-1
Seat (Trader ID) #1: ABCD-2
Seat (Trader ID) #1: ABCD-3
Seat (Trader ID) #1: ABCD-4
Team Password: apples
RIT Credentials give your team access to Practice Servers, Practice Sessions, and Competition Day Servers.

Roles
Some cases require team members to play specific roles. Teams can decide which team members will play which roles. 
For cases that have roles, only specific Trader IDs will be in operation, and they will be tied to a specific role. 
To use our movie analogy, for each case with roles, only certain seats will be available.
Teams can decide which team members have a seat, and which team members watch from the aisle. 
Commodities Case

ABCD-1: Role of Producer
ABCD-2: Role of Refiner
ABCD-3: Role of Trader #1
ABCD-4: Role of Trader #2
ETF Case

ABCD-1: Role of Trader #1
ABCD-2: Role of Trader #2
ABCD-3: Role of Trader #3
ABCD-4: Role of Trader #4
Algorithmic CAPM Trading Case

ABCD-1: Role of Algo Trader
Commodities Case: Each team member is required to trade in a specific role for this Case.
ETF Case: All team members participate in this case, and all have the same role.
Algorithmic Trading Case: Any one member may represent the team in the single role in this Case.
Electricity Trading Case

ABCD-1: Role of Producer
ABCD-2: Role of Distributor
ABCD-3: Role of Trader #1
ABCD-4: Role of Trader #2
Volatility Case

ABCD-1: Role of Trader #1
ABCD-2: Role of Trader #2
Algorithmic Market Making Trading Case

ABCD-1: Role of Algo Trader
Electricity Trading Case: Each team member is required to trade in a specific role for this Case.
Volatility Trading Case: Any two team members may represent the team in this case in the two roles.
Algorithmic Trading Case: Any one member may represent the team in the single role in this Case.
Getting Started Resources
RIT REST API Tutorial
Download Link
REST API ALGO Python Algorithm for Speed Bump
Download Link
REST API ALGO Python Algorithm for Market Making
Download Link
RTD User Guide
Download Link
Commodities Case

Manual trading case,
REST API will be enabled for information retrieval,
RTD Links VBA will be disabled.
ETF Case

Manual trading case,
REST API will be enabled for information retrieval,
RTD Links VBA will be disabled.
Algorithmic CAPM Trading Case

Everyone will be seated in the lab,
REST API will be enabled for info ret and order execution,
RTD Links VBA will be enabled for information retrieval and order execution.
Electricity Trading Case

Manual trading case,
REST API will be enabled for information retrieval,
RTD Links VBA will be disabled.
Volatility Case

REST API will be enabled for info ret and order execution using Python and MATLAB,
RIT VBA Links will be enabled on only 72 machines (we strongly suggest using Python instead)
Algorithmic Market-Making Trading Case

Everyone will be seated in the lab,
REST API will be enabled will be enabled,
RTD Links VBA will be enabled for information retrieval and order execution.
 

Important note about VBA:

Please note that VBA is unavailable for all cases, except for the two Algorithmic Cases.  Also, there are limited seats for the Volatility case.

Students, please fill out this survey to indicate which technology you will use for the Volatility case by February 16th, 3:00pm (EST).  Please only have 1 answer per team.

 

We understand the inconvenience caused by the changes in the cases. Going forward, participants are encouraged to use Python during the competition, VBA will be enabled on the practice server on a temporary basis to allow participants to convert their VBA code to Python. This decision stems from Microsoft licensing restrictions, which only allows licenses to be used by a single user (or terminal).  This becomes unrealistic in a competition setting where multiple laptops must be set up. Due to the licensing obstacles, Excel is not installed on the temporary competition machines located outside the Lab.  We must ensure all participants use the same tool (Python) throughout the event so all computers will be equipped with Python for the competition.

 

In previous years, Microsoft licensing operated differently, where an offline site license could be installed on any computer. Since moving to Office365, Microsoft licensing is based on single-user allocation. This creates challenges in a competition setting such as RITC. Alternatively, Python is openly supported and available on all competition computers (and publicly as well), therefore the use of Python was selected for that specific reason.

 

Furthermore, MathWorks MATLAB will be available for participants to use in the Volatility case, check the getting started Volatility case page for more details and sample codes.

RIT Market Simulator Installation Instructions for Practice
RIT Installation Guide
Download Link
Practice Server
The Practice Server allows you to explore RIT prior to the Competition Day.  The Practice Server will be disabled on Competition Day. Some cases require team members to play specific roles. Teams can decide which team members will play which roles. 

To log into any Practice Server port, please use the trader ID and password we will send you on February 1, 2024.

The case structure on practice servers and during the competition will be the same, but market dynamics may be different depending on the participants’ trading behaviour. Price paths will also be different during the competition. In addition, market parameters during the competition may be adjusted to better account for over 100 live traders.

We are running fixed iterations of Commodities case, Electricity case, and Volatility case.  ETF case and Algorithmic cases are randomized in each heat.

We will make the actual competition cases available on the Practice Server by Thursday February 15th at 11:59 pm (EST).

Cases below will use the following server host name: flserver.rotman.utoronto.ca

Current active port as of February 1, 2024.

Case 01: Commodities Case - Port number: 16510
Case 02: ETF Case - Port number: 16520
Case 03: Algorithmic CAPM Case Server 1 - Port number: 16530
Case 04: Electricity Case - Port number: 16560
Case 05: Volatility Case - Port number: 16565
Case 06: Algorithmic Market Making Case Server 1 - Port number: 16570
Additional ports below are now available.

Cases below will use the following server host name: flserver-test.rotman.utoronto.ca

Current active port as of February 5, 2024.

Case 03: Algorithmic CAPM Case Server 2 - Port number: 16605
Case 03: Algorithmic CAPM Case Server 3 - Port number: 16610
Case 06: Algorithmic Market Making Case Server 2 - Port number: 16615
Case 06: Algorithmic Market Making Case Server 3 - Port number: 16620